# population
 UNICEF population data repository

Spatially disaggregated population maps are crucial for accurate impact assessments and planning humanitarian operations, in particular, those focusing on epidemics and public health, food security, conflicts, natural disasters, and a changing climate.
Existing gridded population data, however, suffer from limitations driven by the applications of simple dasymetric mapping methods. 
While data produced using these methods works for certain contexts, we show that these methods do not produce accurate population maps for low-income and vulnerable regions. 
In this study, we propose a novel method to disaggregate administrative level population data into high-resolution pixel-level population density estimates by measuring cluster level population density using a conditional multiple regression method.


Accurate population maps provide a critical layer of information for governments, international agencies, and non-1governmental organizations (1), and are essential for allocating resources, policy making, and working towards achieving2the sustainable development goals (2). Traditional sources of population estimates come from censuses, which are performed3once every 5-10 years (depending on the country) and are representative to a specific administrative level. However, for certain4advanced geospatial analyses administrative-level population estimations are too limited to provide adequate information on the5demographic distribution – more finely grained estimates are required. Recently, the increased availability of high-resolution6satellite imagery combined with advances in remote sensing and deep learning techniques have shown promise to fill this gaps.7As such, today there exist several globally available gridded population maps, containing data with spatial resolution from 108km level down to 30 meters (see Table 1). While recent developments are encouraging, the available population estimates9have limitations and biases. This study identifies the limitations of existing gridded population datasets and presents a novel10approach to improve the disaggregation of census data to create detailed gridded population maps.11The Global Population of the World (GPW), produced by Columbia University’s Center for International Earth Science12Network (CIESIN) and now in its 4th version, provides extrapolated estimates of gridded population at 5 to 10km resolution13for years 2000, 2005, 2010, 2015, and 2020. GPW maps are build on census data, which are collected and processed into14administrative boundaries with the intentions to provide a broad overview of population distribution for macro scale policy15making process (3). Since the initial release in 1995 GPW has extensiveley been used for environmental mapping problems,16however, as the demand for more accurate and higher spatial resolution population data increased, efforts have been made to17produce higher resolution population data. WorldPop introduced a machine learning based method to estimate population18distributions at pixel level using multiple geospatial covariates as dependent variables and micro census data as the independent19variable (4). Using aRandom Forest-technique WorldPop produced gridded weighting layers which predict population density20at 3 arc seconds resolution (approximately 100 m at the equator). This "prediction layer" is then used as input-weights in21a dasymetric redistribution to disaggregate population counts from administrative units into grid cells. Recently, Facebook22released their own 30m gridded population estimates (5), which have been made available through the Humanitarian Data23Exchange (HDX) (6). Based on the assumption that population should be estimated only in the settlement area, Facebook24applied deep learning algorithms on high resolution satellite imagery to delineate built-up area at 0.5 m resolution, and25subsequently aggregated the estimates into 30m resolution pixels (5). Both WorldPop and Facebook make improvements on the GPW estimates, each in their own way: Facebook population data provides comparatively accurate information on built-up27areas, while WorldPop’s maps provided realistic representations of population distributions within administrative boundaries at28much higher resolution compared to the GPW dataset. However, both WorldPop and Facebook population maps suffer from29so-called zoning boundary effects, see Figure 1. These effects appear due to the dasymetric mapping method that are applied30to disaggregate the reference administrative level census data into grids-level estimates. This causes distortions in the analysis31when the different boundaries systems are used in the analysis i.e. the Modifiable Areal Unit Problem(MAUP) (7). In addition32to that, there are further issues in WorldPop data, as some of their weighted layers predict a positive population density where33no human populations exists – for instance in active volcanoes.

Our objective was to build a framework to overcome such issues in the existing gridded population datasets by combining35the two different approaches used by Facebook and WorldPop and the cluster based optimization methods for disaggregation of36census data. We demonstrate the approach here with an example of Democratic Republic of Congo where there are different37census with different boundaries systems exist.

